\input texinfo @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename easymacs.info
@settitle Easymacs
@c %**end of header

@iftex
@multitablelinespace=12pt
@raggedright
@c These don't help
@global@hbadness=10000
@global@tolerance=10000
@global@emergencystretch = .9@hsize
@end iftex

@macro endpagenote {}
@noindent
(hit ``q'' to quit help, Alt-Shift-F1 to return to the main help page or ``l'' to backtrack)
@end macro

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Easymacs: (easymacs).     An easy to learn configuration for Emacs.
@end direntry

@node Top
@top Easymacs

@noindent
Easymacs is an easy to learn configuration for Emacs.

@noindent
Here is a quick survival guide:

@quotation
New file: Ctrl-N    |
Open file: Ctrl-O   |
Save file: Ctrl-S @*
Close file: Ctrl-W  |
Exit Emacs: Alt-F4  |
Interrupt: Escape @*
Undo: Ctrl-Z        | 
Show open files: F9 |
Browse menus: F10 @*
Switch to next open file: Ctrl-Tab@*
@end quotation

@noindent
@strong{NB} You can hit Alt-Shift-F1 to get back to this page.

@noindent
Here are some quick links to more information about keystrokes.  Follow
a link with the cursor and Enter key, or click on them with your mouse.

@menu
* Using Emacs::
* The Macintosh Keyboard::
* Basic File commands::
* Motion commands::
* Insertion and Deletion::
* Miscellaneous Commands::
* Commands for help and finding files (F1)::
* Bookmark Operations (F2)::
* Search and Replace Operations (F3)::
* Window Operations (F4)::
* Text Shortcuts (F5)::
* Commenting; appending and prepending (F6)::
* Folding and Outlines (F7)::
* Spelling (F8)::
* Managing Open Files (F9)::
* Commands for Specific File-types (F10-F12)::
* Numeric Keypad::
* Advanced Topics::
@end menu

@node Using Emacs
@unnumbered Using Emacs

Here are some general observations about the behavior of Emacs that may
seem odd to the new user:

@itemize
@item 
If you use a keyboard command to do something (such as @key{F1} to
open a file), you will usually be prompted at the bottom of the screen,
whereas if you use the mouse to select that same command from a menu,
you may be presented with a dialog box instead.  This is deliberate.

@item
If you are entering text at the prompt at the bottom of the screen, the
@key{Tab} key will often help you to complete a partially-typed answer.
If you have no idea what answer to give, hit @key{Tab} right away to get
a list of the expected responses.

@end itemize

@node The Macintosh Keyboard
@unnumbered The Macintosh Keyboard

Use Apple-F14, Ctrl-F14, or Alt-x easymacs-mac-swap-modifiers to switch
between Mac-style and PC-style modifier keys.

In Mac-style, you can use the Apple (``command'') key for Easymacs Ctrl
and the key marked Ctrl for Easymacs Alt.  In PC-style, use the Apple
key for Easymacs Alt and the Ctrl key for Control.

There are a number of Function key combinations that are normally
reserved by the operating system, but you can still send these to
Easymacs by combining them with the ``option'' key (marked with ``alt''
and a broken line).  Alternatively, you can configure OS X not to use
these combinations (System Preferences -> Keyboard & Mouse -> Keyboard
Shortcuts).  The combinations likely to be a problem are: Ctrl-F1,
Apple-F5, Ctrl-F7, Ctrl-Shift-F7, Ctrl-F8, F9, Shift-F9, F10, Shift-F10,
F11, Shift-F11, F12, Shift-F12.

If you inadvertently switch on ``accessibility mode'' by hitting
Ctrl-F1, even more function keys will be affected; switch it off by
hitting Ctrl-F1 again, or via the Preferences pane.

@node Basic File commands
@unnumbered Basic File commands

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item Ctrl-N
@tab New File
@tab Start a new file.  You will be prompted to give it a name, so that
Emacs will know what sort of file it is, and will be able to
give you the help appropriate for that sort of file.

@item
@item Ctrl-O
@tab Open File
@tab Open an existing file, using a dialog box.

@item
@item Ctrl-Shft-O
@tab Insert File
@tab Like open file, but insert the contents of another file into the
current file.

@item
@item Ctrl-S
@tab Save File
@tab Save the file to disk.  If the file has been changed since the last
time it was saved, there will be two asterisks on the left side of the
status bar at the bottom of the screen.  

@item
@item Ctrl-Shft-S
@tab Save As
@tab Save current file under a new name, and switch to editing it. 

@item
@item Alt-S
@tab Save All Files
@tab Save all open, modified files, prompting to ask about each file 
that has been changed since it was last saved.

@item
@item Ctrl-W
@tab Close File
@tab Close the current file.

@item
@item Ctrl-Shft-W
@tab Close All Files
@tab Close all open, unmodified files, without quitting Emacs
(ask for confirmation).

@item
@item Ctrl-q, Alt-F4
@tab Quit
@tab Quit Emacs

@item
@item Escape
@tab Cancel
@tab Interrupt your current command.  

@item
@item Ctrl-Z
@tab Undo
@tab Undo the last operation

@item
@item Ctrl-X
@tab Cut
@tab Cut the selected area and store it in the clipboard

@item
@item Ctrl-C
@tab Copy
@tab Copy the selected area into the clipboard

@item
@item Ctrl-V
@tab Paste
@tab Paste contents of clipboard at cursor position

@item
@item Ctrl-A
@tab Select All
@tab Select all of the contents of the file

@item
@item Ctrl-F
@tab Find
@tab Type a search term at the bottom of the screen (it's case-insensitive,
unless you use upper-case letters in your search term).  As you type
letters, you can see the progress of the search.  If you find what you
are looking for, hit Return to get out of search mode, keeping the
cursor where it has arrived; or hit escpae to get out of search mode and
return to where you started.  While you are in search mode, you can hit
Ctrl-F again as often as you like to repeat the search.

@item
@item Ctrl-Shft-F
@tab Find backwards
@tab As above, but search backwards through the file.

@item
@item Ctrl-R
@tab Replace
@tab Find and replace strings of text from the cursor forward, or if
there is a selected region, within that region.

@item
@item Ctrl-Shft-R
@tab Confirm Replace
@tab As above, but ask for confirmation of each change.

@item
@item Ctrl-P
@tab Print
@tab Print-preview the current document (requires an external posrscript
viewer, like gv or ghostview)

@end multitable



@node Motion commands
@unnumbered Motion commands

Move the cursor with the arrow keys, holding the Shift key down to
select text.  Here are some other keys.  Most of them can also be used
with the shift key held down to extend the selected text by that amount.

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item Home, End
@tab Home, End
@tab Hit once to go to the beginning/end of the line, and again to go to
the beginning/end of the text on the line.  If the line is longer than
one line on the screen, you can hit it several times progressively.

@item
@item Ctrl-Home, Ctrl-End
@tab Beginning/End of File
@tab Go to the beginning or end of the current file.

@item
@item PgUp, PgDn
@tab Page Up/Page Down
@tab Page up or down through the text, preserving your position, so that
if you page up a few times, you can return the cursor to the place it
started by hitting page down a few times.

@item
@item Ctrl-PgUp, Ctrl-PgDn
@tab Top/Bottom of Screen
@tab Move cursor to the top or bottom of the screen

@item
@item Alt-PgUp, Alt-PgDn
@tab Scroll other Pane
@tab When the window is divided in two, these commands page up or down
in the other pane of the window, i.e. the one in which the cursor 
is not active.

@item
@item Alt-Up, Alt-Down
@tab Sticky Scroll 
@tab Scroll one line at a time, but keep cursor in the same position

@item
@item Ctrl-Up, Ctrl-Down
@tab Up/Down Paragraph
@tab Ctrl with the Up/Down arrows moves up or down one paragraph


@item
@item Ctrl-Alt-Up, Ctrl-Alt-Down
@tab Move Line Up/Down
@tab Move the current line up or down relative to the rest of the text

@item
@item Ctrl-Left, Ctrl-Right
@tab Word Left/Right
@tab With the Ctrl key held down, the left or right arrow
will move the cursor one word to the left or right

@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Insertion and Deletion
@unnumbered Insertion and Deletion

The most important keys for inserting and deleting text are Ctrl-C
(copy), Ctrl-X (cut), Ctrl-V (paste), explained above, and you can also
use Shft-Delete for cut, Shft-Insert for paste, and Ctrl-Insert for copy.  

@noindent
The Insert key switches from insert to overwrite mode; the status bar at
the bottom of the screen shows ``Ovwrt'' in overwrite mode.

@noindent
Here are some other keys:

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item Ctrl-Backspace
@tab Delete Word
@tab Ctrl with Backspace deletes a word backwards.

@item
@item Ctrl-Delete
@tab Delete Word
@tab Ctrl with Delete deletes a word forward.

@item
@item Alt-Insert
@tab Copy Line
@tab Copy the current line of text into the clipboard

@item
@item Alt-Delete
@tab Cut Line
@tab Cut the current line of text into the clipboard

@item
@item Alt-Home, Alt-End
@tab Delete to Beginning/End
@tab Delete all of the text from the cursor to the beginning or end 
of the current file.

@item
@item Ctrl-Shft-V
@tab View Clipboard History
@tab Emacs keeps a history of the most recent bits of text 
you have put in the clipboard.  So use Ctrl-V to paste the current
contents of the clipboard, but Ctrl-Shft-V to view the history of past
contents of the clipboard; then hit Return to select the bit you want to
paste.

@item
@item Ctrl-@@
@tab Insert char 
@tab Insert literally the next character typed, even if it is a control character.

@end multitable

@noindent
Here are some keys for dragging text around, which in some cases may be
handier than cutting and pasting:

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item Ctrl-Alt-Up
@tab Drag line up
@tab Drag the current line up by one line, or if text is selected drag up all lines
selected, rounding up selection to whole lines.

@item
@item Ctrl-Alt-Down
@tab Drag line down
@tab Drag the current line down by one line, or if text is selected drag down all lines
selected, rounding up selection to whole lines

@item
@item Ctrl-Alt-Left
@tab Drag word left
@tab Drag the current word left by one word, or if text is selected drag all words
selected, rounding up selection to whole words.

@item
@item Ctrl-Alt-Right
@tab Drag word right
@tab Drag the current word right by one word, or if text is selected drag all words
selected, rounding up selection to whole words.

@item
@item C-A-Shft-Left
@tab Drag left by character
@tab Drag the current character left by one character, or if text is selected drag all text
selected by one character.

@item
@item C-A-Shft-Right
@tab Drag right by character
@tab Drag the current character right by one character, or if text is selected drag all text
selected by one character.


@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Miscellaneous Commands
@unnumbered Miscellaneous Commands

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item F10
@tab Browse Menus
@tab A keyboard shortcut that allows you to browse the menus at the top
of the screen with the arrow keys.

@item
@item Shft-F10
@tab Insert Unicode
@tab Insert a Unicode glyph by providing its name at the prompt (use the
Tab key for suggestions and completion).

@item
@item Alt-Q
@tab Wrap Paragraph
@tab Re-wrap and re-format the current paragraph

@item
@item Alt-Shft-Q
@tab Unwrap Paragraph
@tab Put paragraph all on one line

@item
@item Alt-L
@tab Lowercase Word / Region
@tab Make the rest of the word, from the cursor onward, lowercase; if
text is selected, make all text in that selection lowercase.  With the
shift key, operates on the previous word.

@item
@item Alt-U
@tab Uppercase Word / Region
@tab Make the rest of the word, from the cursor onward, uppercase; if
text is selected, make all text in that selection uppercase. With the
shift key, operates on the previous word.

@item
@item Alt-C
@tab Capitalize Word / Region
@tab Make the rest of the word, from the cursor onward, lowercase with
the first letter uppercase; if text is selected, make all words in that
selection lowercase with uppercase first letters.  With the
shift key, operates on the previous word.

@item
@item Ctrl-E
@tab Exchange Case
@tab Change the case of the letter after the cursor from upper to lower
or vice-versa, and move on character forward.

@item
@item Ctrl-Shft-E
@tab Invert Case Backward
@tab Change the case of the letter before the cursor from upper to lower
or vice-versa, and move one character backward.

@item
@item Ctrl-/
@tab Bounce Expression
@tab Move from the beginning to the end or from the end to the beginning
of a balanced expression, such as one enclosed by () [] or @{@}

@item
@item Alt-/
@tab Browse to URL
@tab When the cursor is on a URL, open it in the default browser

@item
@item Alt-G
@tab Goto Line
@tab Prompts for a line number to go to. 

@item
@item Alt-`
@tab Next Error
@tab When the window is split because you are looking at the result of a
command such as compile, grep or locate, this command will go to the
next location in that result where there was an error, or the text you
were looking at was found, etc.  If there are no such results visible,
then when editing a LaTeX file, this will move to the next TeX error; in
an XML file, it will move to the next validation error.

@item
@item Ctrl-`
@tab Previous Error
@tab As above, but goes to the previous result or error.

@item
@item Ctrl-Break
@tab Suspend
@tab Suspend Emacs, iconifying it if in a windowing system, putting it
in the background in a terminal emulator.

@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Commands for help and finding files (F1)
@unnumbered Commands for help and finding files (F1)

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item F1
@tab Open File
@tab Open file, selecting it not with a dialog box, but with prompt at
the bottom of the screen.  At the prompt, type the name of a file or
directory.  Use the Tab key to auto-complete file and directory names.
Just hit return to get a selectable listing of the files in the current
folder.

@item
@item Shft-F1
@tab Contextual Help
@tab Show help on the element near the cursor.  Only some file-types
implement this.

@item
@item Alt-F1
@tab Open Recent File
@tab Show a menu of recently opened files; hit return to open the
selected file.

@item
@item Shft-Alt-F1
@tab Help
@tab Show the main Easymacs help page

@item
@item Ctrl-F1
@tab Insert File
@tab Like open file, but insert the contents of another file into the
current file.

@item
@item Shft-Ctrl-F1
@tab Locate File
@tab Locate a file on disk by typing its name.  Requires the locate
command and its database to be installed.

@item
@item Ctrl-h
@tab Emacs Help
@tab Access the Emacs help system with Ctrl-h.  Be aware that many
keystrokes it describes are different from Easymacs, and it uses a
different vocabulary to describe things.

@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Bookmark Operations (F2)
@unnumbered Bookmark Operations (F2)

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item
@item F2
@tab Next Bookmark
@tab Go to the next bookmark in the file

@item
@item Shft-F2
@tab Previous Bookmark
@tab Go to the previous bookmark in the file

@item
@item Alt-F2
@tab Toggle Bookmark
@tab Set or unset bookmark at current line

@item 
@item Ctrl-F2
@tab List Bookmarks
@tab Display a menu of previously named bookmarks

@item
@item Shft-Ctrl-F2
@tab Name Bookmark
@tab Set a named bookmark at the current position

@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Search and Replace Operations (F3)
@unnumbered Search and Replace  Operations (F3)

The main keys are Ctrl-F (find) and Ctrl-R (replace), explained above.

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item F3
@tab Search Word
@tab Search forward for the word under the cursor.  If you are already doing
a search, F3 will repeat the search forward.

@item
@item Shft-F3
@tab Search Word Backward
@tab As above, but backward through the file.

@item
@item Alt-F3
@tab Replace Regexp
@tab Search for a regular expression and replace it forward from the cursor
position to the end of the file, or if text is selected, within the
selected text; do not ask for confirmation.

@item
@item Shft-Alt-F3
@tab Confirm Replace Regexp
@tab As above, but ask for confirmation before making each change.

@item
@item Ctrl-F3
@tab Occur Lines
@tab Show a menu of all of the lines in the current file that match a pattern
(regular expression). You can switch to the menu (with Shft-F4) and
then hit Return or use the mouse to jump to each corresponding line in
the file, but even easier is to use Alt-` (next-error) to go to each
location in turn.

@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Window Operations (F4)
@unnumbered Window Operations (F4)

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item F4
@tab Unsplit Window
@tab If the window is divided, expand whichever part the
cursor is in to take up the whole window.

@item
@item Shft-F4
@tab Other Windowpane
@tab If the window is divided, switch cursor to the next pane
of a divided window.

@item
@item Ctrl-F4
@tab Close File
@tab Close the current file; if you have any unsaved changes 
in this file, you will be prompted to save them.  The next open file
will appear in the window instead.

@item
@item Alt-F4
@tab Exit Emacs
@tab Exit Emacs; if you have any unsaved changes in any open 
file, you will be prompted to save them.

@item
@item Shft-Ctrl-F4
@tab Split Window Vertical
@tab Split the window so that two views of the same file appear one next to
the other.  You can then compare two parts of the same file
side-by-side, or by switching one of the files, compare two files side
by side.  This splitting can also be done by holding the Ctrl key and
clicking the middle mouse button on the status line near the bottom of
the window.

@item
@item Shft-Alt-F4
@tab Split Window Horizontal
@tab Split the window so that two views of the same file appear one above the
other.  This can also be done by holding the Ctrl key and clicking the
middle mouse button on the scroll bar.

@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Text Shortcuts (F5)
@unnumbered Text Shortcuts (F5)

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item F5
@tab Complete Word
@tab Complete the current word, cycling through alternatives 
(if you go past the word you want, use Ctrl-Z (undo).  It looks for
words in the current file, then in other open files.

@item
@item Shft-F5
@tab Duplicate Line
@tab Duplicate the current line, or if an area is currently highlighted,
duplicate that.

@item
@item Ctrl-F5
@tab Character Above
@tab Duplicate the character from the line above, 
and move one character forward.

@item
@item Shft-Ctrl-F5
@tab Character Below
@tab Duplicate the character from the line below, and move one character 
forward.

@item
@item Alt-Shft-F5
@tab Begin Macro
@tab Begin recording a keyboard macro.  If you want to automate a
repetitive process, hit Alt-Shft-F5, perform the actions you wish to
repeat, then Alt-F5 to stop recording the macro.  If necessary, move the
cursor and then hit Alt-F5 again to replay the recorded actions.

@item
@item Alt-F5
@tab Execute/End Macro
@tab If currently recording a keyboard macro, end the recording; if not,
begin executing the macro.

@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Commenting; appending and prepending (F6)
@unnumbered Commenting; appending and prepending (F6)

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item F6
@tab Toggle Comment
@tab If current line is commented out, uncomment it; if uncommented,
comment it; or do this for all lines in the currently selected area.

@item
@item Shft-F6
@tab Duplicate and Comment
@tab Duplicate and comment out the current line or all lines in the currently
selected area.

@item
@item Alt-F6
@tab Append
@tab Append text to the current line, or to all lines in the selected area.

@item
@item Shft-Alt-F6
@tab Unappend
@tab Remove appended text from the current line, or from all lines in the
selected area.

@item
@item Ctrl-F6
@tab Prepend
@tab Prepend text to the current line, or to all lines in the selected area.

@item
@item Shft-Ctrl-F6
@tab Unprepend
@tab Remove prepended text from the current line, or from all lines in the
selected area.

@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Folding and Outlines (F7)
@unnumbered Folding and Outlines (F7)

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item F7
@tab Toggle Fold
@tab If on a closed fold, open it; else close the fold at the cursor

@c @item
@c @item Shft-F7
@c @tab 
@c @tab 

@item
@item Alt-F7
@tab Fold All
@tab Hide all folds in the file or selected region.

@item
@item Shft-Alt-F7
@tab Unfold All
@tab Show all folds in the file or selected region.

@item
@item Ctrl-F7
@tab Next Heading
@tab Go to the next heading in the file (only for file-types where 
that is meaningful).

@item
@item Shft-Ctrl-F7
@tab Previous Heading
@tab Go to the previous heading in the file.

@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Spelling (F8)
@unnumbered Spelling (F8)

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item F8
@tab Fix Misspelling
@tab If a word at or before the cursor is indicated to be misspelled
with red color and underlining, you can use this to change it to a
suggested spelling, and again to get the next suggested spelling, and so
on.  This is very handy when you discover a simple misspelling after
typing on for a bit, since you don't have to move the cursor there and
back to fix it.  It will not change words that are in yellow to indicate
unknown words that are used more than once in the file.

@item Shft-F8
@tab Suggest Spelling
@tab When you have typed the beginning of a word, you can use this to
suggest various ways of finishing it.

@item
@item Alt-F8
@tab Dictionary Lookup
@tab Look up the current word in a dictionary.  Uses a dict server on
the local computer, if one is running, otherwise connects to
www.dict.org

@item
@item Alt-Shft-F8
@tab Change Dictionary
@tab Switch spellchecking dictionary to a different language or
dialect. Hit Tab at the prompt to get a list of installed
dictionaries.

@item
@item Ctrl-F8
@tab Spellcheck File
@tab Ordinarily, words are only marked as misspelled as the cursor
passes near them; this command runs from beginning to end of the file
(or selected region), marking all unknown words.

@item
@item Ctrl-Shft-F8
@tab Spellcheck File
@tab Spellcheck not by underlining misspellings, but by running through
the text of the file or selected region, prompting for what to do for
each suspected misspelling.

@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Managing Open Files (F9)
@unnumbered Managing Open Files (F9)

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item
@item F9
@tab Show Open Files
@tab Display a list of open files.  You can switch to any of them by moving
the cursor to its line and hitting Return, or with the mouse.  

@item
@item Shft-F9
@tab Select Open File
@tab Another way of switching among open files.  A list of open files is
displayed on the bottom of the screen, and you can type any part of the
name of any one of them; as you type, the list is narrowed down to only
those files that match what you type.  When the file you want moves to
the head of the list, hit Return to switch to it.

@item
@item Ctrl-F9
@tab Speedbar
@tab Another way of switching open files.  A new window pops up either
showing a list of files in the same folder or directory as the current
file (hit @key{f} to get this, or showing a list of currently open files
(hit @key{b} for `buffers' to get this).  This list can also show
subsections within many types of file; use the @key{+} and @key{-} keys
to expand and collapse the display of sub-categories.  Use @key{Enter}
to switch to a given file or part thereof, and @key{q} to get rid of the
window.

@item
@item Alt-F9
@tab Eshell
@tab Start a command shell in the folder or directory of the current
file.  If there is a shell open, switch to it and change to the working
directory of the current file.

@item
@item Shft-Ctrl-F9
@tab grep
@tab Search for text in files on disk; use Alt-`, or Return or the mouse
to select one.  Only works if you have the `grep' program installed on
your computer.  In LaTeX files, this searches for text in all files that
belong to the current document.

@end multitable

@endpagenote

@node Commands for Specific File-types (F10-F12)
@unnumbered Commands for Specific File-types (F10-F12)


@noindent
With the exception of unmodified F10, function keys F10-F12 are mostly
reserved for functions that are specific to the particular type of file
being edited.  If nothing else is defined for a particular file-type,
the default is that F12 compiles and F11 runs.  Note also that for some
types of files, Shft-F1 produces context-sensitive help.

@noindent
F10 on its own is the key that allows you to navigate the menus with the
keyboard; but note that this does not yet work under GTK for GNU/Linux.


@noindent
Here are the file-types for which there are special keys:

@menu
* LaTeX files::
* XML files::
* Directory listings::
@end menu

@node LaTeX files
@unnumberedsec LaTeX files

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item F12
@tab latex
@tab Run latex or pdflatex on the current document without prompting.

@item
@item Shft-F12
@tab Command
@tab Suggests the next command to run on the document, based on the
output of the last run, eg. bibtex or run (pdf)latex again to resolve
references.

@item
@item Alt-F12
@tab dvips
@tab Run dvips on the .dvi file associated with the current document

@item
@item Ctrl-F12
@tab Toggle PDF
@tab Toggle whether to generate and view PDF files or DVI files.

@item
@item Shft-Alt-F12
@tab latex/dvips
@tab Run latex and dvips on the current document

@item
@item F11
@tab View
@tab In DVI mode, view the output of the current file with xdvi or
(on Windows) yap; in PDF mode, view it with Acrobat Reader or (on Mac OS
X) Preview.

@item
@item Shft-F11
@tab View log
@tab View the terminal output of the currently running process

@item
@item Alt-F11
@tab View postscript
@tab View the .ps output of the current file with gv.

@item
@item Ctrl-F10
@tab Insert skeleton
@tab Insert the bare bones of a LaTeX document of various types; you are
prompted for the sort of document you want.

@item
@item Alt-F10
@tab Insert environment
@tab Insert a new environment, with prompt.

@item
@item Shft-Alt-F10
@tab Change environment
@tab Change the current environment, with prompt.

@item
@item Shft-Return
@tab Complete
@tab If you have typed the first few letters of a LaTeX command, this
will show you the possible completions.  If the cursor is not just after
something beginning with a backslash, it will close the current environment.

@item
@item Ctrl-e
@tab Emph
@tab Put \emph@{@} around text (this overrides the usual meaning, which
is to change the case of the current letter).

@item
@item Ctrl-b
@tab Bold
@tab Put \textbf@{@} around text.

@item
@item Ctrl-p
@tab Small Cap
@tab Put \textsc@{@} around text (for small caPs).

@item
@item Ctrl-_
@tab Underline
@tab Put \uline@{@} around text (requires the ulem package).

@item
@item Alt-f
@tab Footnote
@tab Put \footnote@{@} around text (requires the ulem package).

@item
@item Shft-F1
@tab Contextual Help
@tab Gives help on the usage of the LaTeX command near the cursor

@item
@item Ctrl-''
@tab Correct quotes
@tab Easymacs puts smart quotes in for you when you type a straight
quotation mark (when you really need a straight one, type it twice).
But if you paste some text in from a non-LaTeX document, you may need to
correct the quotes in it.  This function changes straight quotes to
smart ones from the cursor forward, or within the currently selected text.

@end multitable

@noindent
In a LaTeX file, the grep command (Shft-Ctrl-F9) runs by default not on
the current directory, but only on those files that comprise the current
document.


@node XML files
@unnumberedsec XML files

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item
@item Shft-Return
@tab Complete
@tab Auto-complete the markup, based on what is legal at that point,
according to the schema.

@item F12
@tab Toggle script
@tab If you are editing an xhtml file with a
php/css/javascript/etc. block, then pressing this key while inside
such a block will hide the rest of the file, and show you just that
block with proper coloring, indentation help, etc. for that language.
Hit the same key again, and you will be returned to the whole file,
viewed again as xhtml.  

@item
@item Shft-F12
@tab Close Element
@tab Insert a closing tag for the current element.

@item
@item Ctrl-F12
@tab Finish Element
@tab If in a start-tag, complete the tag, and provide a matching close
tag on the next line.

@item
@item Shft-Ctrl-F12
@tab Finish Element
@tab As above, but in-line.

@item
@item Alt-F12
@tab Auto-markup
@tab This command attempts to find a tag to put around the word before
the cursor based on the contents of the current file.

@item
@item Alt-Shft-F12
@tab Split Element
@tab Split current element at cursor into two similar elements.

@item
@item F11
@tab Render
@tab Launch a browser, and view the XML (or XHTML) file rendered.

@item
@item Shft-F11
@tab Transform
@tab Run the current document through an XSLT processor.  Will look for
xsltproc, Xalan, and Saxon in that order.  If the current file looks
like a TEI document, suggest running one of the TEI stylesheets for
conversion to HTML, LaTeX or FO.

@item
@item Ctrl-F11
@tab Reload Schema
@tab If you have edited the schema against which the current document is
being validated, this will reload it.

@item
@item Shft-Ctrl-F11
@tab Edit Schema
@tab Open the schema associated with the current file for editing.

@item
@item Alt-F11
@tab Tag area
@tab Insert an opening and closing tag around the currently selected text.

@item
@item Shft-F10
@tab Insert Unicode
@tab Insert a Unicode character by its full name (use the Tab key for
suggestions and completion).

@item
@item Shft-Alt-F10
@tab Insert Unicode
@tab Insert a Unicode character by its short name (iso8879 name: e.g. eacute).

@item
@item Ctrl-F10
@tab TEI Skeleton
@tab Insert the beginning of a document marked up according to the
guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative.

@item
@item Alt-F10
@tab Show Path
@tab Show all ancestor elements of the current element.

@item
@item Shft-F1
@tab Contextual Help
@tab Looks up the current element in the TEI P5 Guidelines, and shows
the relevant documentation in a browser.

@item
@item Alt-P
@tab Insert Paragraph
@tab Insert a <p></p> pair.

@end multitable


@node Directory listings
@unnumberedsec Directory listings

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item F12
@tab Hide/Show
@tab Toggle hiding of ``uninteresting'' files in the current directory.

@item
@item r
@tab Edit Filenames
@tab This is a powerful and potentially dangerous command that enables
you to edit the names of files in a directory.  Hit Ctrl-C twice when
you are finished to write the changes to the names of the files on disk.

@item
@item s
@tab Sort
@tab Hit ``s'', and then the next key changes the sorting criterion: s
for size, x for extension, t for time, n for name.  Capitalize the
letter to sort in reverse.

@end multitable

@node Numeric Keypad
@unnumbered Numeric Keypad

For those of us who rarely have to enter many numbers into text files,
the numeric keypad is a bit of a waste.  The keyboard shortcuts in this
section are not enabled by default; you must use the Pause key to turn
them on.  Below, KP- stands for ``Keypad''. 

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab Description

@item Pause
@tab Toggle keypad
@tab Switch between using the numeric keypad for math, and for the
convenience commands listed below.  Your current preference is stored
for future sessions.  Shft-Pause will show the current status.

@item KP-Enter
@tab Save
@tab Save the current file (same as Ctrl-S).

@item
@item KP-Plus
@tab Find
@tab Search forward (same as Ctrl-F).

@item
@item KP-Minus
@tab Find Backward
@tab Search backward (same as Shft-Ctrl-F).

@item
@item KP-.
@tab Toggle accents
@tab Turn on and off a special way of inserting characters not present
on your keyboard.  When this mode is enabled, for example, "u produces
u-umlaut, 'e produces e-acute, ~!  produces the upside-down exclamation
mark, /o gives o with a diagonal stroke, and so forth.  Your operating
or windowing system may also provide another way of entering such
characters.

@item
@item Shft-KP-.
@tab Unsafe Char
@tab After pasting in text from somewhere else, there may be characters
that cannot be represented correctly in the encoding of the current
file.  Instead of presenting gibberish, Emacs complains when you try to
save the file.  This command moves to the next character that does not
fit in the current encoding.

@item
@item Ctrl-KP-.
@tab Insert char 
@tab Insert literally the next character typed, even if it is a control character.

@item
@item Alt-KP-.
@tab Repeat 
@tab Repeat the last command, which may have been complex, such as a search
and replace.

@item
@item KP-0
@tab Wrap Paragraph
@tab A shortcut for Alt-q, which re-wraps and re-indents the current paragraph.

@item
@item Alt-KP-0
@tab Show Blanks
@tab Make whitespace visible (toggle).

@item
@item Ctrl-KP-0
@tab Line Numbers
@tab Show line numbers (toggle).

@item
@item KP-8, 2
@tab Scroll Text
@tab The 8 or 2 keys on the keypad (which often have up and down arrows on them)
arrows scrolls the text up or down, relative to the cursor, by one line.

@item
@item KP-4, 6
@tab Switch file
@tab The 6 or 4 keys on the keypad (which often have right and left arrows on them)
circulate through the list of open files in either direction (like
Ctrl-Tab and Ctrl-Shft-Tab).

@item
@item KP-5
@tab Show position
@tab If you want to cycle through the open files with KP-4 and 6, but
don't know which direction to head in to find the file you want, this
will display the next and previous files at the bottom of the screen.

@item
@item KP-7, 1
@tab Start/End of file
@tab The 7 or 1 keys on the keypad (which often have Home and End on them)
go to the start and end of the current file (like Ctrl-Home/End).

@item
@item KP-9, 3
@tab Top/Bottom of screen
@tab The 9 or 3 keys on the keypad (which often have PgUp and PgDown on them)
go to the top and bottom of the screen (like Ctrl-PgUp/PgDown).

@item
@item Alt-KP--
@tab Align Columns
@tab Align the selected text into minimally-separated columns, as defined by whitespace.

@item
@item Alt-KP-+
@tab Align Columns
@tab As above, but do not minimize whitespace.


@item
@item KP-*
@tab Toggle Case
@tab Invert the case of the current letter, and move to the next (like Ctrl-E).

@item
@item Shft-KP-*
@tab Toggle Case
@tab As above, but moving backwards (like Ctrl-Shift-E).

@item
@item Shft-KP-/
@tab Bounce Paren
@tab If on a parenthesis or brace, move to the matching one (like Ctrl-/).


@end multitable


@node Advanced Topics
@unnumbered Advanced Topics

@menu
* Selecting Rectangles::
@end menu


@node Selecting Rectangles
@unnumberedsec  Selecting Rectangles

There are advanced facilities available for selecting columns of text,
or arbitrary rectangles, and working with them, but this section will
only give a quick introduction.

Ctrl-Return turns rectangle mode on and off again; one you start it,
you can extend the selection by moving the cursor.  The cut and copy
commands work as you would expect.

To insert the same text in a whole series of lines, select a column and
type the text.




@bye
